So, when we design an algorithm for a problem,
we need to represent the information of the
problem in a way that we can manipulate. So,
this is called modeling. So, we need some
kind of notation and structures to model the
problem. So, in this module we will look at
a very important class of structures called
graphs which are immensely useful in many
different contexts.
So, let us start with the problem of coloring
a political map. So, here is a map of the
states of India, as you can see the different
states have different colors. Now, what is
the principle behind this coloring? When we
color a state, we must make sure that no state
adjacent to it has the same color, no two
states which are side by side that share a
common boundary should have the same color,
because otherwise it is difficult for us to
distinguish one state from another.
So, we can see that Rajasthan has a different
color from Gujarat, because Rajasthan and
Gujarat at this point share a common boundary.
Similarly, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have
a boundary, therefore Rajasthan and Madhya
Pradesh have different colors. On the other
hand, Rajasthan and Telangana do not share
a boundary, so we can use the same color for
Rajasthan and Telangana.
So, question we may ask is given such a map,
how many colors do we need to color it to
satisfy this criteria. Now, clearly we can
assign every state a different color and thus
we can ensure that no two states which have
a boundary in common, in fact no two states
anywhere in the map have the same color. But,
in many situation we might expect to do with
much fewer than that many colors. So, our
question is, how many colors do we need?
So, here is the way to represent this problem
more abstractly. So, the first thing we do
is that we replace, we do not replace, we
actually assign to each state in the map,
a black dot. So, roughly where the state,
center of the state we place this black dot.
Now, we have to record the information about
how these states are neighbors of each other.
So, what we do is we connect every pair of
states that share a boundary.
So, as we saw Rajasthan and Gujarat have a
boundary in common, a border and so we put
this kind of an edge between Rajasthan and
Gujarat, on this map. Now, our coloring problem
is to assign colors to the states, so that
no two states which share an edge which are
on opposite size of an edge have the same
color. So, coloring the state is the same
as coloring the dot associated with the state.
So, we can start for example, with a state
like Uttar Pradesh and give it a red color
and now this is red, it means that state which
are near it such as Uttarakhand, or Haryana,
or Rajasthan, or Madhya Pradesh, or Chhattisgarh,
or Jharkhand, or Bihar. None of these can
now be colored red, because they are all neighboring
states. So, in the next step having colored
Uttar Pradesh red, we have now colored Haryana
with different color say blue and Uttrakhand
which has a common boundary with both Haryana
and Uttar Pradesh is now colored green, so
we have used three colors.
If we proceed to Rajasthan, we find that Rajasthan
does not share a boundary with Uttrakhand.
So, it is possible to reuse the green color,
so with sticking with three colors, we can
extend our coloring to Rajasthan. When we
get to Punjab, now Punjab is not even connected
to Uttar Pradesh, so we can reuse the red
color of Uttar Pradesh for Punjab. However,
when we come to Himachal Pradesh, we find
that Himachal Pradesh is connected to Punjab
and Haryana and Uttrakhand and therefore,
we have already used up these three colors
and we must use a fourth color for Himachal
Pradesh.
So, if you keep continuing in this way, we
can eventually assign colors to all the states
in the country which satisfy this particular
property. That whenever, I see two dots, if
they are connected by a line, then the two
dots have different colors, this captures
abstractly the property that we want any two
states with a common border, to have different
colors on the map.
So, now if you look at this map coloring problem,
the actual map underlying these dots is now
not necessary anymore, because the dots captured
everything about the map. So, we can actually
throw away the underlying picture, and just
keep this pattern of dots and the connections
between them and if we assign colors to these
dots, keeping in mind that these lines are
represent common boundaries, we are solving
the same problems as solving the original
map coloring problem.
So, this kind of a diagram, is what we call
a graph, so these dots are called vertices,
so these are the vertices, they are also called
nodes. So, there are two words to describe
these, nodes and vertices. It is useful to
know that vertices is the plural of vertex,
so vertex is one node, many nodes are called
vertices and these connections are the edges.
So, we have edges between vertices, so it
is very simple. A graph is just a picture,
it consists of some dots which are nodes or
vertices and some connections between them
which are called edges.
So, the problem that we have solved is called
graph coloring. So, we used four colors, you
can check that we have used four colors, we
have used blue, green, red and yellow and
we have managed to color this entire graph
with just these four colors. Now, you might
ask is it a property of this graph or is it
a property of all graphs. So, in fact it turns
out that if you take any map of the kind that
we drew and convert it into a graph like we
did, four colors are always enough.
Now, this is a mathematical fact about graph.
So, you can take a particular problem about
coloring a particular map and then we can
ask a general question about all maps of this
kind and we can actually prove a mathematical
fact about it or a theorem, which says that
in any map which is derived from this kind
of a, any graphs which is derive from this
kind of a map, four colors are enough to solve
the graph coloring property. Now, this is
not an easy problem to solve, it was an open
problem for many years and it was a very celebrated
theorem, when it was actually proved.
Now, you might observe that though we have
found a coloring of this map using our graph
with only four colors, the original map which
we started with had many more than four colors.
So, we have this, if you look around, you
will find 1, 2, 3, 4 and then 5 at least five
colors on this map, 6 if you include this
white and so on. So, though we have a theorem
that we can use four colors, in actual practice
the person who has colored this map has used
many more than four colors.
So, one of the advantages of moving to a representation
such as a graph is that we have thrown away
all the inessential features of the problem,
we do not need to know the shape of this state,
we do not need to know its size. We just need
to know which state is connected to which
state, that is which state is the border of
which state. So, now once we have the graph,
then we can redraw the graph.
For instance we can expand out these kinds
of crowded portions to make the connections
more obvious and we can work with this modified
graph and the solution to this modified graph
is exactly the same as the solution to the
original graph, the problem does not change.
So, one of the most important features of
modeling a problem is to keep the essential
parts of the problem and to throw away the
inessential part, so that you can focus on
the problem that actually needs to be solved.
So, another problem that we have seen which
is easily representable as a graph is that
of an airline routing. So, when we have airline
routing, you might ask given the routes of
an airline which are represented in this kind
of a format, by cites and arrows between them
indicating flights in one direction, you might
ask questions about connectivity. Can I go
from New Delhi to Trivandrum without changing
airlines.
So, this is again a problem, where we can
focus on the connectivity and throw away the
actual graph, it does not really a matter
to us the actual map, it does not matter to
us how far apart these cities are, where they
are with respect to each other. All we are
interested in knowing is which city is connected
to which city by a flight and given this what
kind of routes can I find between pairs of
cities.
So, formally a graph just consists of two
parts, it has a set of vertices or nodes which
is normally written V and there are set of
edges which are pairs of vertices. So, each
edge is the pair v comma v prime. Now, if
you have a graph of the kind that we had for
the map where we were coloring it, then we
do not distinguish whether v is before v prime
or v prime is before v. When, we say that
two states share a common boundary, it does
not matter which order we mention them in.
So, there is an edge between v and v prime,
if and only if there is an edge between v
prime and v, so there is only one edge between
any pair of vertices. On the other hand, in
the airline graph we had directions, we might
have a flight from one city to another city,
but not back. We have this triangular kind
of things, where we could go from one city
to another there and back.
So, this does not mean that you cannot go
back directly on this direction, so these
are directed graphs. So, if we have an edge
from v to v prime in a directed graph, we
do not guarantee that there is an edge from
v prime to v. And as we saw, we can now easily
describe these kinds of graphs as pictures
by just drawing the nodes and then connecting
the edges as lines. So, either undirected
or we could have directed graph in which we
draw lines with arrows to indicate the direction.
So, the graph coloring problem is a problem
on an undirected graph and we can formally
say that the problem is to find a coloring
C, a coloring C is a function that assigns
to each vertex v a color C of v and in terms
of the graph, when we have an edge v and v
prime in our edge set, then C of v should
be different from C of v prime. This is what
it means to be a legal coloring. So, we can
now take this graph as a mathematical object
and describe the problem to be solved in a
completely objective way as a mathematical
problem in terms of the vertices and the edges.
Similarly, we can express the problem of finding
a root in the mathematical sense, initially
our problem is a directed graph. Then, we
identify the vertices corresponding to the
cities, where we want to find the nodes. So,
here we have v 0 represents New Delhi and
v 5 represents Trivandrum, and our goal was
to find a route from v 0 to v 5 from New Delhi
to Trivandrum. So, such a route can be described
as a path, so a path is just a sequence of
vertices connected by edges. So, we want to
find a sequence of vertices such the first
vertex v 0 is where we want to start, the
last vertex v k is where we want to end and
each pair of vertices along the part v i,
v i plus 1 is a flight is an edge in our graph.
Now, it is not required that a graph needs
to be directed for this problem to make sense,
we could take the same graph and we could
assume they are undirected, that is the airline
actually serves all pairs of cities in both
directions, the problem still makes sense.
So, now, we have an undirected graph, but
we say that v 0, v 1 is an edge, means v 1,
v 0 is also an edge. We can go backwards and
forwards and the same question now, can we
find a sequence of vertices, which starts
at v 0 and goes to v 5 such that every pair
on this path, every v i, v i plus 1 is an
edge in E.